In this lecture, you'll learn about the OSPF DR and BDR designated routers. You saw in the last letcure
that when you enable OSPF on a router's interface, the router will send Hello packets out that interface,
trying to discover other OSPF routers
that it can form an adjacency with. When two OSPF routers on the same link send Hello packets to each
other,
they will first off move into the two-way state, where they've discovered each other.
They will then move into the exchange state, where they will agree to exchange routing updates with each
other, will then move through loading where they're exchanging the updates.
And finally, they'll be at the full state where they are fully adjacent and they've shared all of their
routing information with each other, and on point-to-point links, OSPF router pairs will always form a full
adjacency.
So point-to-point links, there can only be two routers there, so of course, they're going to want
to share their full information with each other. But on multiaccess segments, such as Ethernet, where there
can be multiple routers,
it's inefficient for all routers to form a full OSPF adjacency with each other.
If you look at the example here, you can see I've got an Ethernet segment,
all 4 routers are plugged into the switch, and on their interfaces connected to that switch,
they're all in the same IP subnet. So I've got R1 with 10.0.0.1/24, R2 with
10.0.0.2/24, R3 with 10.0.0.3/24, and R4 with 10.0.0.4/24.
So in the example, they've all got OSPF enabled on their interfaces, so they're going to be sharing OSPF information
out on this link here.
And if you think about it, it would be inefficient if that was a full mesh,
if they were all sharing the full information with each other, because there would be a lot of repetitive
information there being sent
out to the same link. So a better idea would be if one of these routers could be elected as a type of
master, and then all the routers could share the information with the master, and then it could reflect
that information out to the other routers.
So rather than having a full mesh, they just send the information to the master, and it's up to the master
to reflect it out and that is exactly what happens, and what the Master is called is the DR, the Designated
Router. Now, because we do have a master there,
obviously, that could cause a problem if the master goes down. Particularly, if a router, say, has just sent
an update to that master and then the master was down before it can send the update to the other routers,
well, that information would be lost. That would be a problem.
So because of that, we want to have some redundancy here. So as well as having the master, the DR, the Designated
Router,
we're also going to have a BDR, that's a Backup Designated Router as well,
just in case the DR goes down.
Okay, so let's look and see how this works. As I just said, a DR, Designated Router, and a BDR, Backup Designated
Router, are elected on each multiaccess segment.
If I go back to the diagram again here,
you can see all my routers, they've got an interface connected to the same multiaccess segment. So the DR
and the BDR, it acts at the interface level, not at the entire router level.
If, for example, R1 had another interface, which was also connected to an Ethernet segment,
that separate segment would also have its own DR and BDR elected as well.
So the DR and BDR, it's at the interface level and it works like this on all multiaccess segments,
such as Ethernet. The router with the highest priority becomes the DR and the router with the second highest priority,
not surprisingly, becomes the BDR. The default priority on the routers is 1, and the higher the number,
the better, the more preferred. The possible values are 0 to 255, with 255 being the best possible
value.
If you configure a value of 0, that means that that router will never be the Designated Router, and the
highest router ID is used in the case of a tie.
So if you don't explicitly set the priority, all the routers on the link are all going to have the same priority
of 1.
We still need to have a DR elected. The one that is going to be elected as the DR is the one with
the highest router ID, and in the real world, that is what will typically happen. Because if you've got
routers that are connected to the same link, they're probably going to be very similar model of routers
anyway.
This just really not put a lot of load on routers,
so normally, you're not going to really care which one is the DR.
You just need to understand how this works,
so that if you do have problems, you can troubleshoot it. But as far as configuring anything, typically, real world,
you'll just leave the routers to figure it out themselves as to which one is going to be the DR.
In the CCNA exam, you might be asked to configure one as the DR though, so you need to understand how
this works, and you need to know how to configure priority as well.
Okay.
When this happens on multiaccess segments, such as the Ethernet, the routers elect the DR and BDR
at the 2-way stage,
if you remember of stages from the last lecture. When the routers have not discovered each other
yet,
the OSPF state is down.
They then send Hellos when they discover each other through the Hello messages,
then they move to the 2-way stage.
So at the 2-way stage, they have not started exchanging any routing information yet.
They then move through the exchange, the loading, and the full states. So with the DR and the BDR election,
that happens at the 2-way stage before the routing information has been exchanged.
And if you think about it, that makes sense because we don't want all the routers exchanging the full
information with each other, just with the DR and the BDR.
So, we need to have this set up before routing information is exchanged between the routers. Now, the
election just happens on multiaccess segments. On the router, it knows that that interface is an Ethernet interface,
so it knows that there needs to be a DR elected there.
If there was another, say, a Serial interface with a point-to-point link, then the router knows that is a
point-to-point link, and there's not going to be a DR elected on that link.
There are a few types of connections which could be either point-to-point or multipoint, like that can
happen with Frame Relay, which is not covered in the CCNA anymore.
Some of those older legacy interfaces, you do need to specify whether it is point-to-point or a
multiaccess segment. But for the CCNA exam, you don't need to know that. Okay,
so if we do want to manually set which of the routers is the DR, we use the command,
again, this is at the interface level,
so I've got 'interface FastEthernet 0/0', 'ip ospf priority 100'.
As long as you set it more than 1, that is going to be the preferred router. If you wanted to configure
a DR and a BDR, you could configure the DR with 100, for example, and the BDR with 50,
for example. If you want to specify that a router will not become a Designated Router, then you can set
'ip ospf priority 0' on the interface.
Now, after you've configured this command on the interface, it's not going to actually make anything happen.
It's not going to take effect until OSPF has been restarted on that interface.
So, how could you do that?
Well, you could reboot the router, or you could shutdown the interface and and bring it back up again, or at the enable
prompt, you could use the 'clear ip ospf command' to restart the OSPF process.
Obviously, all of those would be disruptive,
so be careful if you're going to do it in a production environment.
The DR and BDR establish full neighbor state with all routers on the network segment.
The neighbor state of other routers remains in a two-way state and they do not directly exchange routes
with each other.
So for example, on the example topology we had at the start of the lecture where we had R1, R2,
R3 and R4,
let's say that R1 is the DR and R2 is the BDR. Well, R1 and R2 will go to the full
state with all of the other routers. On R3 and R4,
they will go to the full state with R1 and R2 because those are the Designated Routers.
But if you look at the state between R3 and R4, because neither one of those is a Designated
Router, they will just be in the two-way state with each other.
So routers which are not a Designated Router will just have a two-way relationship with each other.
They're not exchanging full routing information directly with each other.
The R3 and R4 will still learn each other's routes though, because that will be reflected
down from the Designated Router. So when a link state changes on a router, if there's a new link comes up
or if a link goes down, and that's connected to multiaccess segment,
it sends a multicast LSU, Link State Update, packet to 224.0.0.6, which is the multicast address
for all Designated Routers. So it's just to the DR and the BDR that are listening in for packets that is sent
to that address. So again, with our example, if any of the routers, R1, R2, R3, or R4, sees a
link state change, it will send an update about that to 224.0.0.6, and both the DR
and the BDR will learn about that change. Then, just the DR, not the BDR as well, the DR multicasts the update to
224.0.0.5, all OSPF routers, so all OSPF routers on the link will learn about it. So that's why
when there is any changes, it's just sent to the DR and the BDR. The DR then sends that out to the other routers on
the link, so if there's any change anywhere, all the routers on the link will still learn about it. Okay, so that's
how the DR and the BDR work. In the next lecture, I'll show you how to verify what's happening, which
routers are the DR and the BDR, also how to influence what ones they will be if you want to do that,
with a lab demo.